The Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the First United States Flag, by 
J. Franklin Reigart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The History of the First United States Flag
       and the Patriotism of Betsy Ross the Immortal Heroine That
       Originated the First Flag of the Union

Author: J. Franklin Reigart

Release Date: January 31, 2016 [EBook #51088]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIRST UNITED STATES FLAG ***




Produced by Emmy, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: THE FIRST U.S. FLAG AND SEAL.

MRS. BETSY ROSS THE AUTHOR.]




    THE HISTORY

    OF THE

    FIRST UNITED STATES FLAG,

    AND THE PATRIOTISM OF

    BETSY ROSS,

    THE IMMORTAL HEROINE THAT ORIGINATED THE

    FIRST FLAG OF THE UNION.

    DEDICATED TO THE LADIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

    BY COL. J. FRANKLIN REIGART,
    Author of the “Life of Robert Fulton.”

    HARRISBURG, PA.
    LANE S. HART, PRINTER AND BINDER.
    1878.




    Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1878, by
    LANE S. HART,
    in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington, D. C.




PREFACE.


IN 1824, when General Lafayette arrived at Philadelphia, and was nobly
welcomed as “The Nation’s Guest,” the writer of this book was staying
several weeks at the hospitable home of his amiable and kind relative,
Mrs. BETSY ROSS. The arrival of Lafayette excited and brightened her
extraordinary memory, as she very cheerfully entertained all her
friends, by relating the most interesting facts of the Revolution,
and its FLAG of Victory. Her words we well remember. She objected,
as a member of the society of “Friends,” to sit for her portrait,
nevertheless, a miniature of her in crayon was made, and is now highly
prized; and at this late day, we deem it our duty to publish the
true history of the origin of the first FLAG of our Country, and the
patriotism of America’s most illustrious Heroine.

    The BRAVEST of the brave demands our song,
    Who made the FLAG so firm and strong,
    Of all earth’s emblems the brightest diadem,
    The FREEMEN’S shield, the PATRIOT’S gem.

Listen to her thrilling, cheering voice, her soul-inspiring, martial
song, whilst a dozen of the ladies of her household joined in the
chorus, as she handed over each Flag to the gallant troops, on their
way to camp, and roused their enthusiasm to the highest pitch. The
ladies of the Revolution loved her for her magnanimous and modest
Quaker deportment, and the army of Washington applauded her dignified
admonitions, so full of patriotism and power of song. Quakers very
seldom sing, but BETSY ROSS always said, “_My voice shall be devoted
to God and my country, and whenever the spirit moves me, I’ll sing
and shout for liberty!_”—and with an enthusiasm for INDEPENDENCE,
exhibiting a spirit power, only to be equalled by absolute phrensy, she
waved her Flag aloft, and she did sing to the gallant volunteers, the


“WAR SONG OF INDEPENDENCE.”

    “Come on, my hearts of temper’d steel,
    Away! away! to arms!!
    No foreign slaves shall give us law,
    No British tyrants reign;
    ’Tis INDEPENDENCE makes us free,
    And FREEDOM we’ll maintain.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    “A soldier is a gentleman,
    His honor is his life,
    And he that won’t stand by his FLAG,
    Will ne’er stand by his WIFE.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    “Then hark! to arms! to arms!! to arms!!!
    ’Tis the time that tries men’s souls!
    The rising world shall sing of you,
    A THOUSAND YEARS to come,
    And to your children’s children TELL
    The WONDERS you have done.
          When to conquest you did go! did go! did go!
          With the red, white and blue,
          To conquest you did go.”

Many inspired songs (after the close of the war for American
Independence) were carried home by Gen. Lafayette, (the companion
of Washington,) Rochambeau, and many of the French engineers and
soldiers, on their return to France, having proved their chivalry and
united their hearts, blood, songs and arms with Americans, for the
liberties of America; and, but for the “WAR SONG” of BETSY ROSS, the
“Marseillaise Hymn” would not have been written by Rouget de Lille, a
French officer of engineers, in 1791. Marshal Luckner commanded the
French Revolutionary army at that time on their march from Marseilles
to Paris; that whole army became phrensied by the words of the “WAR
SONGS” of American Independence, that they had helped to gain, and
Rouget de Lille caught the inspiratory words, “_And hark, away to
arms! to conquest we will go!_” and quickly composed the song that
he entitled the “_Chant de Guerre de l’ Armée du Rhin_,” the “War
Song of the Army of the Rhine,” which the Parisians, some years
afterwards, named the “_Hymne des Marseillaise_.” Thus the “_War
Song of Independence_” became combined, in word and spirit, in the
“_Marseillaise Hymn_,” and has ever since enlivened the march of the
armies of France to conquest and played an important part in the
revolutions, not only of France, but of other Continental States.

In 1870, William J. Canby, Esq., (the grandson of Mrs. John Ross,) of
Philadelphia, read before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, a
very interesting paper on the subject of the “Centennial Anniversary of
the American Flag,” in which he stated that his maternal grandmother,
“Betsy Ross,” was the first maker of the “Stars and Stripes.” She lived
in Arch street at the time, and continued in the business of making
Flags for many years.

[Illustration]




MRS. BETSY ROSS,

THE AUTHOR OF THE FLAG AND SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES.


MISS ELIZABETH GRISCOM was born 1742, in Philadelphia, and was
married in 1762 to Mr. John Ross, a merchant of that city. She was a
strict member of The Society of Friends, and by them always called
“BETSY ROSS.” She was unsurpassed in fine needlework, and well known
throughout Philadelphia and New York cities as the most artistic
upholstress in America. She used the most superior, richest and finest
of imported embroidered velvets, satins, silks and woolens, that were
brought to this country by the packet ships of Caleb and Thomas Cope,
Boyd & Reed, and John Ross, agreeably to her express orders; and she
had a dozen or more of her sisters, daughters and nieces constantly
employed sewing and finishing variegated needlework, in the very best
manner, as she directed them; and thus no other upholsterer could
possibly compete with her. She was a natural artist, an inventive
genius, who fully understood the best effects of complimentary colors,
and the grandeur of the primary colors; yet, strange as it may appear,
though one of the plainest of “QUAKERS,” she invariably used cloths
of the very _brightest_, and in every instance the _primary colors
combined, so as to be distinguished from all other objects_, and she
quickly judged and comprehended the styles that would best please her
customers. Her brilliant draperies and tri-colored curtains, in the
public halls, hotel parlors, and drawing rooms, were greatly admired;
whilst General Washington, General Hand, Thomas Mifflin, George Clymer,
Jared Ingersoll, J. Koch, Gouveneur Morris, Robert Morris, Judge James
Wilson, Frederick A. Muhlenberg, Joseph Wilson, Caleb and Thomas Cope,
Thomas Wilson, Timothy Matlack, James Trimble, and William Shippen,
are some of the names on her store-books, as her generous and kind
friends and patrons, whose heirs still possess beautiful curtains and
magnificent quilts of variegated silks and satins, unsurpassed, at this
day, for beauty of utility, justness of composition, that none but a
perfect artist could produce; and the constant use of materials of
primary colors were her praise, excellence, and fame.

Colonel George Ross, (a member of the Continental Congress,) and
James Trimble, (afterwards Deputy Secretary of Pennsylvania,) were
her brothers-in-law, and through their suggestions, she adorned, with
drapery, the Hall of Congress, and the Governor’s reception room. Her
upholstery in the ladies’ cabins and state rooms of Caleb and Thomas
Cope’s packet ships was unrivalled and not equalled by the state rooms
of the European packets; whilst from the topmasts of Cope’s packets,
her waving red, white, and blue STREAMERS made glad the travelers
of the seas, several years before the Revolution of 1776. Some of
the theatres and public halls of Philadelphia were embellished and
decorated with curtains of white, mazarine, and scarlet velvets and
silks in waves, festoons, and pendents, and in many instances the
curtains were embroidered with gold and silver figures of vines,
leaves, and _stars_ that glittered with superb brilliancy, whilst the
curtains were invariably supported by a golden spread eagle, with
lightning darts in its talons and a silvery olive branch in its beak;
and these were the original and wonderful _handiwork_ of Betsy Ross.
She could not think of or invent anything _brighter or more graceful_
than her most celebrated gay and glittering primary colored _curtains_,
spangled with stars and supported by a golden eagle, that already
ornamented and adorned the interior of the chief HALLS of the land.
They were her daily delight and divinely brilliant dreams by night.
With her _scissors_ she cut the form of a small shield, upon which
she sewed five-pointed stars and tri-colored stripes, in imitation of
General Washington’s coat-of-arms, which embraced stars and pales upon
his escutcheon; this shield she fastened upon the eagle’s breast; and,
inspired with one bright thought, she seized her meritorious daily
work, flung it to the breeze, hung it “UPON THE OUTER WALLS,” and the
Freemen of Columbia cheered, and hailed it “THE FLAG OF THE UNION!” And
that one independent FLING made all the people KING!

At the request of Dr. Franklin, Mr. Robert Morris and Col. George Ross,
she designed and made the first FLAG of the United States, consisting
of thirteen red and white stripes, a blue field as a square, on the
left and upper corner, and upon the blue field was a spread eagle, with
thirteen stars, in a circle of rays of glory, surrounding its head,
and the United States SEAL was afterwards made from the same design
of the United States Flag, viz: A red, white and blue shield on the
breast of an American Eagle, holding in its talons an olive branch and
thirteen arrows; in its beak a scroll inscribed with this motto, “_E
Pluribus Unum_,” and above its head thirteen stars arranged in a circle
of glory. These designs were approved and adopted by the Committee
and Congress, and they were made before the words “United States of
America,” were legally used. The country was called “Columbia,” the
Congress was styled the “Continental Congress,” the States were called
“Colonies,”; every petition sent to the King of Great Britain, and
every public document, were issued by “The North American Colonies;”
our Country _had no name_ until BETSY ROSS marked upon her Flags,
“THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.” Dr. Franklin, John Adams and Thomas
Jefferson had been appointed (December, 1775, by Congress, a Secret
Committee) to prepare a FLAG, and a device for a SEAL for the Colonies,
and Dr. Rittenhouse was requested by the Committee, to engrave the
Seal corresponding with the eagle on the Flag.

On the 4th day of July, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was
finished and signed, and the Rev. Dr. Duché, Chaplain of Congress, had
offered up his celebrated “_Prayer of Independence_,” the STAR SPANGLED
BANNER was unfurled, and emblazoned the Hall of Independence, and hung
around the spire of the Old State House Bell, as it sounded its tones
of warning beyond the city limits, re-echoed across the Delaware, and
proclaimed the liberty of the land, amidst the thundering shouts of
Freemen, the roaring of cannons, musketry, firearms, and bonfires;
then the Secret Committee, Franklin, Jefferson and Adams, was publicly
announced by the President of Congress, and the SEAL (already made) of
the “_United Colonies_,” was used that day. Aye! the Flags waved, the
Seal was engraved, and the thirteen “UNITED STATES OF AMERICA” were
saved.

The Flag was afterwards adopted by Congress, June 14, 1777, and
September 15, 1789, they passed the act, that “The SEAL heretofore used
by the ‘UNITED COLONIES’ in Congress assembled, shall be the SEAL of
the ‘UNITED STATES;’” and for his beautiful workmanship in engraving
that seal, Dr. Rittenhouse was honored with the appointment of Director
of the United States Mint; and Franklin styled Rittenhouse, “the Newton
of America.”

Mrs. Ross also engaged Mr. George Barrett, (of Cherry near Third
street, Philadelphia,) an ornamental painter, and accomplished artist,
to paint upon the blue fields of one dozen silk Flags, a gilded
bald-headed spread eagle, with thirteen silvered stars encircling its
head in rays of glory, which were executed in the finest artistic
style, for the use of Congress and General Washington’s army; they
were always much admired, and daily used until worn out; and, Betsy
Ross also directed Mr. Barrett to ornament the army drums with the
same design of the eagle and thirteen stars, and the letters “United
States of America,” that gave great delight and spirit to the drummers,
to such an extent that Mr. Barrett was kept busy ornamenting flags,
flagstaffs, and drums for Washington’s army. The committee of Congress
were so much pleased with the design of the eagle and thirteen stars
that they concluded to adopt and use it for the “NATIONAL SEAL”
exclusively; but, Betsy Ross, Col. George Ross, and Lieut. Paul Jones
earnestly protested against despoiling the Flag by leaving out and
omitting the eagle, and declared that the Army might, if they choose,
have the stars only, but as for the Navy they would never give up the
BALD EAGLE, the conquerer of all birds, belonging only to America;
and from that day to this the bald eagle of America spreads its wings
upon the Flags of the United States Revenue vessels as the emblem of
freedom, independence, liberty, power, empire, and victory.

From that time our beautiful Flag was composed of thirteen stars and
stripes. The red stripes were emblematic of fervency and zeal; the
white, of integrity and purity; the blue field with stars, of unity,
power, and glory. The number thirteen was symbolical of the thirteen
colonial states, that severed their allegiance from the sovereignty
of Great Britain, and declared, in 1776, that they were free and
independent powers.

The size of the Flag of the army is six feet six inches in length, by
four feet four inches in width, with seven red and six white stripes.
The first seven stripes, (four red and three white,) bound the square
of the blue field for the stars, the stripes extending from the
extremity of the field to the end of the Flag. The eighth stripe is
white, extending partly at the base of the field.

According to the act of Congress, April 4, 1818, on the admission of
every new State into the Union, a star was to be added to the galaxy of
the most brilliant Banner of earth.

Mrs. Betsy Ross put all her household to work in earnest, and the
“FLAGS,” made of silk and bunting, were not only admired, but
afterwards approved and adopted by the committee of Congress. General
George Washington, Dr. Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson,
frequently visited her store, to see what progress she was making,
and were not only pleased, but expressed their astonishment at her
dexterity and judgment, and in the most flattering terms complimented
her for her remarkable skill with the SCISSORS, as she folded a piece
of white silk and with one cut formed the beautiful five-pointed star.

Mrs. Ross, by order of the Government, continued making the army and
navy Flags of the United States for upwards of fifty-five years,
and after her death, in 1832, her daughter, Mrs. Clarissa S. Wilson
continued the business, and they became generally and widely known
as the most patriotic ladies of America. After the death of Mr. John
Ross, she was married to Mr. John Claypoole, the grandson of Sir John
Claypoole, the grandson of Oliver Cromwell, who came to Philadelphia
with William Penn. She afterwards moved from Arch near Third street, to
Second street near Dock, where she resided until her death, at the good
old age of four score years and ten.

Mrs. Betsy Ross was of medium height, strong in form, but remarkably
graceful and erect; she had a handsome face, a very fair transparent
complexion, projecting eyebrows, blue sparkling eyes, and light brown
hair. She was a perfect “FRIEND” in all her speech and movements;
possessed of the most refined sprightly intellect and polished
education; in fact she was well known throughout the whole of
Philadelphia city, as a “_sharp, thorough going woman_.” FIRST in
Friends’ Meeting, where the spirit moved her to speak and to act; FIRST
amidst the Daughters of Benevolence, furnishing clothing and lint for
the Continental troops, scattering printed patriotic songs and appeals
amongst them; and FIRST and most effective in her attentions to the
sick. She was, in truth, what her friends styled her, “A Healing
Medium,”—but respected and esteemed by all the physicians and surgeons
of Philadelphia, as “_the true Friend of the sick_,” for when her hand
touched and bathed the burning fevered brow of the sick soldier, he
knew that he had one friend, and that friend was a true one. Whenever
she entered the sick chamber, she saturated her handkerchief with
vinegar, (that she carried in a phial in her pocket, as a precaution
against contagion,) and after wiping her forehead, lips and hands,
she quietly approached the bedside of the afflicted invalid, and
placing her hand upon his forehead, she would whisper these words,
“_In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I pray that your health may
be restored_,” and then she would administer the medicines and
restoratives as directed by the visiting physicians; and her angelic
nature, purer than that of Jeanne Dare, was the powerful agency of
health. She was the worthiest Heroine of the Revolution.

During the frightful devastation caused by the yellow fever in 1793,
Mrs. Betsy Ross was most active in alleviating the terrible miseries
of that epidemic. Moved with sorrow at the sufferings of others, she
carried not only her own life in her hands, but medicines to relieve
the sick and dying. Day and night she ceased not; whilst her angelic
visits were cheered with success. Her personal perfections irresistably
commanded the admiration and love of the sick and afflicted to such a
degree, that the celebrated Dr. Benjamin Rush, styled her the “Magical
Quakeress.” They who would not now honor, esteem, and love the name
of Betsy Ross do not deserve to enjoy the protection of the glorious
starry Flag of the Union, in the land of the free and home of the
brave, or in any land upon earth where the Flag of the Union waves. Her
biography will ornament the brightest pages of our country’s history,
and her STATUE, surrounded by a group of her daughters and nieces,
cutting, sewing and making the “Star Spangled Banners,” must soon
grace the Capitol of our nation, and the patriotic Ladies of America
will design, erect, and pay for it. Yes, the friend of Washington,
Franklin, Adams, Jefferson, Morris, Jones, Rittenhouse, Ross, the
immutable friend of Liberty, and of the soldiers of the Independence of
1776, will forever live in the hearts of all freemen.




JOHN PAUL JONES,

WITH THE FIRST U. S. FLAG, ESTABLISHING THE FREEDOM OF THE SEAS.


PAUL JONES, the bravest of Naval Commanders, was born at Selkirk,
Scotland, 1730, and came to America about 1770, to fight the battles
of Liberty and Independence. He was styled “The Washington of the
Seas,” “The deadliest foe of Cowards.” Lieutenant Paul Jones and Mrs.
Elizabeth Ross, of Philadelphia, became intimate friends and neighbors,
well known as the most zealous patriots in the cause of Independence,
doing battle against tyrants and oppressors, and Thomas Jefferson, Dr.
Franklin, John Adams, Dr. Rittenhouse and Robert Morris were their
truest and most steadfast friends and patrons. Mrs. Ross designed and
made the Flag that Lieutenant Jones hoisted upon the Flagship of War,
in the Delaware bay. During the month of December, 1775, by the request
and explicit orders of Dr. Franklin, Col. George Ross and Robert
Morris, the three members of a Secret Committee of Congress, Lieutenant
Jones was supplied with one of Mrs. Ross’ first and best Flags, the red
white and blue emblem of Liberty, for which Congress paid. Afterward,
for Jones’ brave honoring of that Flag, Congress awarded him $25,000
and a golden medal, and he was further complimented by an invitation
to Paris, where the cross of military merit and a sword of honor were
presented to him by the King of France, at the written request of our
Congress, for his dauntless courage and his triumphant victory as the
Captain of the “RICHARD,” with the first Flag of the Union, over the
British Flag of the “SERAPIS.”

In January 1776, the following vessels were fitted out.

The “ALFRED,” of thirty guns and three hundred men, Dudley Saltonstall,
Captain, bearing the Pine Tree Flag, presented by the colony of
Connecticut.

The “COLUMBUS,” of twenty-eight guns and three hundred men, Abraham
Whipple, Captain, bearing the Flag of the Red Cross of Saint George,
presented by the Colony of Vermont.

The “ANDREW DORIA,” of eighteen guns and two hundred men, Nicholas
Biddle, Captain, bearing the Flag of the White Cross of Saint Andrew,
presented by the Philadelphians.

The “CABOT,” of fourteen guns and two hundred men, John W. Hopkins,
Captain, bearing the Pine Tree white silk Flag from Connecticut.

The “PROVIDENCE,” of twelve guns, bearing the Flag with the Cross of
Saint Andrew, presented by Rhode Island.

The “HORNET,” of fourteen guns, bearing the yellow silk Flag of
Virginia, with Rattlesnake.

The “WASP,” eight guns, bearing the yellow silk Flag of South Carolina,
with a Crescent, a Beaver and a Rattlesnake, with the motto, “Don’t
tread on me.”

The Dispatch vessel “FLY,” bearing a blue Flag with Red Cross of Saint
George.

E. HOPKINS, was Commander-in-chief of the fleet, and JOHN PAUL
JONES first lieutenant. JONES was offered the command of the sloop
“PROVIDENCE,” which he declined, declaring that he preferred to
be “CHEVALIER BANNARET,” to hoist and carry the bald eagle, with
glittering stars and stripes, on the flagship “ALFRED,” and when the
Commander-in-chief, E. Hopkins, came on board of her, January 1, 1776,
Jones hoisted the American Union Flag, with his own hands, which was
the first time it was ever displayed on a man-of-war, and waving his
navy cap swiftly overhead, shouted “THREE CHEERS FOR THE RED, WHITE AND
BLUE! THE HAUGHTIEST OF MONARCHS SHALL BOW BEFORE THAT FLAG!!!” “Again,
THREE CHEERS FOR OUR COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF AND THE AMERICAN NAVY!!!” And
thus he boldly evinced his lofty and chivalrous character, bravely
assuming the responsibility, and his achievement of glorious deeds
aided in the recognition of our INDEPENDENCE.

On the 14th day of February, 1778, the United States Flag was, for the
first time, recognized in the fullest and completest manner by the Flag
of France. Lieutenant Paul Jones, on board the brig “INDEPENDENCE,”
at the entrance of Quiberon bay, sailed through the French fleet,
commanded by Admiral La Motte Piquet, (who was keeping the coast of
France clear of British cruisers,) and our NATIONAL EMBLEM was most
courteously complimented and saluted by nine guns. The American Flag
was first carried around the world in 1789, by the “COLUMBIA,” Captain
Gray, of Boston, AND SALUTED IN EVERY PORT.




THE COLONY REBEL FLAGS.


PRIOR to July 4th, 1776, various kinds of Flags were used. Mr.
Endicott, Puritan Governor, aided in a religious crusade against the
cross of St. George; he cut the cross from the Flag flying at Salem,
and was tried for treason, but escaped on the ground that his act was
not actuated by treasonable motives, but religious zeal.

About the first of January, 1776, the immortal Washington unfurled
his Flag in compliment to the United Colonies, but it was so nearly
like the British Flag, that the Bunker Hill patriots objected to it,
because it was a blue Flag with the St. George and St. Andrew’s crosses
combined; too much like the Flag of the Britons. Nearly every regiment
had its own colony Flag. All sorts of devices, corresponding with the
variegated coats of the Continental troops, or militia, scarcely two
alike. They were styled “Colony Rebel Flags;” still, the “Colony Rebel
Flags” were all used as rallying Flags, until they were eclipsed by the
starry Flag, called “The Appeal to Heaven,”—“The Star Spangled Banner.”




WASHINGTON’S ORDER,

FOR “THE FLAG OF THE UNION.”


TO General Putnam, desiring him in the most pressing terms, to
give _positive orders_ to all the Colonels to have “Union Colors”
immediately completed for their respective regiments; and Colonel
Kitzema received the two first regimental silk “stars and stripes” from
the secret committee of Congress, through General Putnam, and Colonel
Curtenieus; whilst the brilliant Banner of the Union floated from the
top of Washington’s headquarters in New York City.

The real truth was, that previous to the “Declaration of Independence,”
the leaders of our armies, the Governors of the thirteen colonies, and
the Continental Congress were afraid to publicly unfurl an INDEPENDENT
UNION FLAG; even Washington’s combined crosses were discountenanced,
disapproved of, and treated with indifference; but, the boldness of
Colonel George Ross and John Ross, with the dashing, daring seamanship
of PAUL JONES, the firm patriotism, industry, and energy of that
devoted friend of Independence, the IMMORTAL BETSY ROSS, who forced the
“Flag of Liberty” forward, as true patriots of America, bid defiance
to all Tory opposition, and flaunted the Stars and Stripes from the
highest pinnacles of our land, the “UNION STANDARD,” that was never
styled a “REBEL FLAG,” or Flag of any single Colony or State, but was
styled “THE APPEAL TO HEAVEN,” made the cherished Flag of Independence,
the triumphant Flag of Earth!




THE RATTLESNAKE FLAG,

OF 1775, THAT CHARMED AND INCITED THE TROOPS OF VIRGINIA TO ACTION.


THE Flag of Virginia was a rattlesnake with blue tongue forked like
lightning, and with thirteen rattles, looking like a fierce Anaconda
coiled, but with head and tail up, painted on white silk, having the
motto, “Don’t tread on me!” It was considered as an emblem of wisdom,
and of endless duration as a representative of America, an animal found
in no other part of the world. The eye of this creature excels in
brightness that of any other animal; it has no eyelids and is therefore
an emblem of vigilance. It never begins an attack nor ever surrenders,
it is therefore an emblem of magnanimity and true courage. It never
wounds until it has given notice to its enemies of their danger. Its
wounds, however small, are decisive and fatal. The power of fascination
attributed to it resembles America. Those who look steadily in its
eyes are delighted, and involuntarily advance toward, and having once
approached it, never leave it.




THE FLAG AT YORKTOWN.


AT the battle of Yorktown, October 19, 1781, the French troops
triumphantly carried our American Stars and Stripes, with the spread
eagle on the blue field, for the eagle was their adoration, and they
stormed the redoubts, led on by the chivalric and heroic Generals
Muhlenberg and Lafayette, who immediately hoisted that Flag upon the
turret of the fortifications. The instant that Lord Cornwallis spied
it, he was terror stricken. The waving of that Flag compelled him to
surrender; for that Flag was the proclamation of Victory! and IT ended
the war in a blaze of glory.




THE FLAG WITH ITS MESSAGE.


WHEREVER the Flag of Betsy Ross went, it waved majestically and above
suspicion; no temptation or opposition could deter it, for her godly
prayer went with it, and upon every Flag she forwarded, she pinned
her printed message, viz: “EVERY MAN THAT IS AGAINST THIS FLAG IS A
TRAITOR.” Aye! where the battle was the hottest, and amidst the hail of
fire where the bullets fell the fastest and thickest, that Flag cheered
the wounded and dying patriots to shout “FIGHT ON! FIGHT ON! FIGHT ON!”
And when the brave Commander Lawrence saw that the Flag on his Frigate
still waved, though wounded and dying, he cried out, in these immortal
words, “Don’t give up the ship!”

On the 28th of June, 1776, the British Fleet and Army of Sir Henry
Clinton commenced their furious “Attack on Fort Moultrie,” but, one
circumstance serves to illustrate the daring, enthusiastic courage and
love for the Flag of Independence which pervaded the American Troops.
In the course of the engagement, the Flag staff of the Fort was shot
away, followed by peals of derision from the minions of the Fleet,
but Sergeant JASPER leaped down upon the beach, snatched up the Flag,
fastened it to a sponge-staff, and while the ships were incessantly
directing their broadsides upon the Fort, he mounted the merlon and
deliberately replaced the Flag, shouting “IT STILL FLIES!” That
warrior’s shout was echoed by the Garrison, and suddenly checked Sir
Henry’s derision. The British Fleet and Army were greatly mortified
by the _flying Stars and Stripes_, and were terribly repulsed by the
brave defence of Fort Moultrie, whilst the whole Garrison were fiercely
echoing and re-echoing the shout—“IT STILL FLIES!!” The news of this
undaunted intrepidity and exulting victory spread throughout the
continent, and Sergeant JASPER was honorably promoted by Congress for
his unparalleled heroism. Yes, thank God, our Flag “IT STILL FLIES,”
and never can be conquered.




THE CENTENNIAL FLAG.


AT the Centennial Celebration and World’s Exhibition at the city of
Philadelphia, 1876, “THE FLAGS OF ALL NATIONS” waved from the highest
pinnacles, but the flashing, glittering “STAR SPANGLED BANNER” far
outshone them all; like a mighty _flame of Liberty_ flying through
the skies, it blazed and waved, streamed and flew as the victorious
Starry Banner of the Firmament, proclaiming by its expanding, snapping,
cracking, sharper, louder sounds, the establishment of Freedom,
Liberty, Independence, and the Union of the World! whilst in every
house its graceful folds protected each and all in their own religious,
family worship; the household Idol of Peace that ever and anon,
silently wafted every daily prayer and song of praise, to the God of
our Fathers, the true and holy Creator of the Universe.




PATRIOTIC SONGS.


THE following are copies of some of the printed SONGS and APPEALS that
BETSY ROSS circulated and distributed with her own hands in the streets
of Philadelphia, and from the front door of her Flag store and depot,
to the troops on their way to Washington’s camp:


THE GALLANT VOLUNTEER OF 1776.

    “Come on, my hearts of temper’d steel,
      And leave your girls and farms,
    Your sports, and plays, and holidays,
      And hark, away to arms!
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the flag of the brave,
          To conquest we will go.

    A soldier is a gentleman,
      His honor is his life,
    And he that won’t stand by his flag,
      Will ne’er stand by his wife.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    For love and honor are the same,
      Or else so ne’er ally’d,
    That neither can exist alone,
      But flourish side by side.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    So fare you well sweethearts awhile,
      You smiling girls adieu,
    Ye made this starry flag divine,
      We’ll kiss it out with you.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    The sun is up, our banner shines,
      The hills are green and gay,
    And all inviting honor calls,
      Away! my boys, away!
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    In shady tents by cooling streams,
      With hearts all firm and free,
    _We’ll shout the freedom of the land,
      In songs of liberty_!
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    No foreign slaves shall give us law,
      No British tyrants reign,
    ’Tis INDEPENDENCE made us free,
      And FREEDOM we’ll maintain.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    We’ll charge the foe from post to post,
      Attack their works and lines,
    And with the stars and stripes aloft,
      We’ll capture their Burgoynes.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.

    And when the war is over, boys,
      Then down we’ll sit at ease,
    Protected by the freemen’s flag,
      And live just as we please.
          When from conquest we shall go! shall go! shall go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          From conquest we shall go.

    Each hearty lad shall take his lass,
      All beaming like a star,
    And in her softer arms forget,
      The dangers of the war.
          When to conquest we did go! did go! did go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we did go.

    THE RISING WORLD SHALL SING OF US,
      A THOUSAND YEARS TO COME,
    AND TO THEIR CHILDREN’S CHILDREN TELL
      THE WONDERS WE HAVE DONE.
          When to conquest we did go! did go! did go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we did go.

    So honest fellows here’s my hand,
      My heart, my very soul,
    With all the joys of Liberty,
      Good fortune and a bowl.
          And to conquest we will go! will go! will go!
          With the red, white, and blue,
          To conquest we will go.”




STIRRING APPEALS FOR CONSTITUTIONAL LIBERTY.


“My lads, you say you are going to fight for LIBERTY! these are words
in everybody’s mouth, but few understand their real meaning. LIBERTY
is not a power to do what we please and have what we desire; this may
be the Liberty of a wolf or of a beast of prey, but is not the Liberty
of a man considered as a member of society. TRUE LIBERTY is the being
governed by laws of our own making; the inhabitants of every country
to choose persons from amongst themselves, in whom they can confide;
which persons so elected shall make laws to bind the whole. True
CONSTITUTIONAL LIBERTY is the LIBERTY for which we are now contending,
and may God in his blessings grant this to us all.

“Now, the King of England, has sent over fleets and armies to compel
us to give up this invaluable privilege into his hands; but with the
blessings of God, we will maintain it against him and all the world, so
long as we have a man left to fire a musket. Let our constant prayer be
GOD and LIBERTY.

“Our Congress have hitherto conducted us with wisdom and integrity,
and although in some instances it may be thought they might have
managed better than they have done, yet they have piloted us in safety
through a tempestuous ocean, to the present period; and so God save the
AMERICAN CONGRESS!”




WASHINGTON, THE IDOL OF AMERICA.


“My lads, I would speak a few words of the GENERAL and his ARMY, now
encamped on the banks of the Schuylkill, enduring all the hardships of
their homely situation with cheerful patience; and what is it think
you blunts the keen edge of the northern winds, and makes content
smile on the tops of frozen hills? I will tell you, it is the love of
that “LIBERTY” I have sat before you, it is the consciousness of the
justice of our cause. I suppose when you think of our incomparable
GENERAL WASHINGTON, you figure to yourselves a stout, bulky man, of a
terrible countenance, covered with gold lace, living in a magnificent
house and having a great train of attendants around him. You are quite
mistaken; he neither has nor needs any external ornaments. Would you
hang farthing candles around the Sun to increase his lustre? His glory
will admit of no addition. Your GENERAL is a plain man, plain in his
dress and frugal at his board; yet a native dignity will command your
respect, and the affability of his manners win your love. He is brave
without ostentation; magnificent without pomp; and accomplished without
pride. He is an honor to the human race and the Idol of America. And so
God save GENERAL WASHINGTON and his ARMY.”




THE IMMORTAL FRANCIS S. KEY.


ON the night of September 15, 1814, whilst the British fleet, under the
command of the English Admiral Cochrane, were bombarding Fort M’Henry,
at the city of Baltimore, FRANCIS S. KEY, was divinely inspired with
the sublime sight of the glorious Banner of the Union still waving over
the Fort, and a thousand times reflected, multiplying and increasing
in splendor, in every stream of fire throughout the skies, every
glare meeting every leaping wave of the billowy Chesapeake Bay, the
heavens and waters together joined, each wave glaring with new admired
light; but, when the Fort resisted all the efforts of the British
ships-of-war, and forced the Admiral to retire, amidst the joyous
exultation, the great shouts of the countless hosts of freemen, “_Sing
ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously!_” “_The Flag of
the Union still triumphs!_” Who? Oh! Who can imagine the feelings of
Francis S. Key, as o’er his head the flying bombs sang terribly, spent
their force in air, and roused all the internal powers of his poetic
spirit, his inspired soul to sing still louder?

      “Oh! say can you see by the dawn’s early light,
        What so proudly we hail’d at the twilight’s last gleaming;
      Whose broad stripes and bright stars thro’ the perilous fight,
        O’er the ramparts we watch’d were so gallantly streaming?
      And the rockets red glare, and bombs bursting in air,
      Gave proof thro’ the night that our Flag was still there.
      Oh! say does that star spangled banner yet wave,
      O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?

    CHORUS—Oh! say, does the star spangled banner yet wave,
            O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?

      On the shore dimly seen thro’ the midst of the deep,
        Where the foe’s haughty host in dread silence reposes;
      What is that which the breeze, o’er the towering steep,
        As it fitfully blows, half conceals, half discloses?
      Now, it catches the gleam of the morning’s first beam,
      In full glory reflected now shines in the stream;
      ’Tis the star spangled banner, oh! long may it wave,
      O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

    CHORUS—Oh! say, does the star spangled banner yet wave,
            O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?

      And where is that band who so vauntingly swore,
        ’Mid the havoc of war and the battle’s confusion,
      A home and a country they’d leave us no more?
        Their blood has wash’d out their foul footsteps’ pollution.
      No refuge could save the hireling and slave,
      From the terror of flight, or the gloom of the grave;
      And the star spangled banner in triumph doth wave,
      O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

    CHORUS—Oh! say, does the star spangled banner yet wave,
            O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?

      Oh! thus be it ever when freemen shall stand,
        Between their loved home and the war’s desolation;
      Blest with victory and peace, may the heaven rescued land,
        Praise the Power that made and preserved us a nation.
      Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
      And this be our motto, “IN GOD IS OUR TRUST;”
      And the star spangled banner in triumph shall wave,
      O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

    CHORUS—And the star spangled banner in triumph shall wave,
            O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Note: Obvious punctuation errors repaired.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the First United States
Flag, by J. Franklin Reigart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIRST UNITED STATES FLAG ***

***** This file should be named 51088-0.txt or 51088-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/0/8/51088/

Produced by Emmy, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

